Telstra partners with Ericsson to build 5G network

Telstra chief executive Andy Penn has chosen Swedish technology company Ericsson as a partner in its upcoming launch of Australia's ultra-fast mobile network 5G, two months after the government banned Chinese-equipment provider Huawei.

In August, the government revealed a ban on Chinese-equipment providers such as global giant Huawei and ZTE from participating in building the country's 5G networks on the basis of security. Rival telcos have publicly and privately criticised this decision, saying it would put pressure on the cost of building the future networks.

However, while Mr Penn declined to say whether Telstra had paid more as a result of fewer competitors after the government's ban, he told Fairfax Media he was "pretty happy" with the overall value.

While the price was an “important” factor he said Telstra is “a premium brand, it’s not all about cost”.

Launching 5G, and staying ahead of competitors such as Optus and a combined TPG-Vodafone, is part of the Telstra boss' plan to turn around the telco, after a difficult couple of years for the share price amid the rollout of the National Broadband Network and intensifying mobile competition.

“We’ve signed a multi-year strategic deal with Ericsson ... We mutually have a same philosophy about being a global leader,” Mr Penn said. About $5 billion is being spent by the embattled telco in the three years to June 2019 to upgrade its networks and enhance capacity.

Telstra launched its 50th 5G-enabled site in Australia on Wednesday, in Canberra, with other sites in Adelaide and Perth. By the end of the year 200 sites will be 5G enabled, though Mr Penn wouldn’t say whether any were in Sydney or Melbourne.

The decision to use Ericsson comes as little surprise, with industry members speculating for months Telstra's long-term technology partner would be first in line. Telstra's Gold Coast-based 5G Innovation Centre was created in collaboration with Ericsson and the two companies completed trials of the technology in 2017.

Ericsson president and chief executive Börje Ekholm said in a statement the companies would "ensure Australia is at the cutting edge of mobile technology".

“Telstra and Ericsson have continued to demonstrate industry leadership through ongoing innovation and collaboration with best in class partners needed to build an end-to-end 5G ecosystem," he said.

Australians wanting to use 5G technology on their mobile phones will need to wait for manufacturers to created 5G-ready devices. Huawei is expected to release a 5G-enabled phone in late-2019. In the meantime, telcos are rolling out the networks to ensure these devices can be tested when they're available.

As Telstra continues plans to turn the business around, Mr Penn is rallying for the NBN Co to cut the wholesale prices it charges providers as margins on retail providers have been squeezed leaving it less profitable to sell these services.

The prices "have got to come down," Mr Penn said. He has been pushing for a $20 cut in price, however NBN Co chief executive Stephen Rue said at senate estimates on Tuesday that a reduction of this magnitude hadn't been considered.

“There isn’t a telco in the world, wholesale or retail, that is increasing their prices at this level," Mr Penn said, “It can only lead to poorer services and higher prices."
